<p>Two parts strong, one part sweet, and one part sour. These are the golden proportions of the classic cocktail, the Pythagorean formula of bibulous bliss. If you make the strong parts cognac, the sweet part Cointreau, and the sour part fresh-squeezed lemon, and if you shake it over ice vigorously [405k .mov] and serve it up with a twist, you will get instant transport back to the days before vodka arrived on the scene and ruined everything. If you can make a brilliant Sidecar, you can make any classic cocktail. 
The sidecar has been in full resurgence during the last year, meaning that both sublime and execrable versions have appeared in the bars we frequent. Out on the town, it is easy to tell if the bartender knows what he or she is doing. A neatly sugar-coated rim, a pale opacity, a biting chill off the glass, and a tartness that makes it impossible to tell where the lemon lets off and the Cointreau begins, means that you've got a live one. If you taste sweet-and-sour mix, you're fucked.</p>
<p>Hailing from a time when men wore hats, the Dodgers were in Brooklyn, and a joint was still your local bar, the Manhattan held court when the cocktail was de rigueur. It also gave blue bloods a chance to slug back a bit of whiskey. On the East Coast, you're likely to get rye whiskey; from Kentucky westward, expect bourbon.</p> 
<p>We take our Manhattans two parts bourbon, one part sweet vermouth, shaken over ice, and poured through a strainer. Occasionally, as with other vermouth cocktails, we'll take 'em dry or perfect, but never overly sweet. Let the vermouth take the edge off the bourbon, but never let it compromise the flavor. Wise bartenders add a dash of bitters to this libation, which would otherwise tend to be overly sweet.</p>
<p>Although we generally abstain from Manhattans during the summer, we're drinking them up now that it's past Labor Day. Of course, the nice thing about San Francisco is that during the course of a month you can find the right day for any drink. This fall, you'll find us at a certain zinc-capped bar, sipping this aesthetic drink from a cocktail glass, getting our ass kicked (in the most genteel fashion) by dose after dose of true Kentucky sour mash. We don't become more and more clever with each round, as we do with Sapphire Martinis, rather we become louder and slightly petulant. And then we catch ourselves, take in our environs, and decide that the one we're drinking is our last.</p>
<p>One advantage of developing an attachment to this drink is that you have at least a 10 percent chance of getting one at any non-dive bar, and the chances are rising. The Sidecar fails to appear in our Gentleman's Companion of 1939, but H. L. Mencken mentions it as one of "a dozen standard varieties," suggesting it was well-established by prohibition. Some recipes call for equal parts brandy and Cointreau. As always, we are partial to the classic proportions.</p>

